IN THE HIGH COURT OF NEW ZEALAND DUNEDIN REGISTRY

CIV-2011-412-000762 [2012] NZHC 507

IN THE MATTER OF

an appeal pursuant to s 106(2)(b) of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003

BETWEEN AND

RAVI VAS VOHORA Appellant
A PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT COMMITTEE Respondent

Hearing: 15 and 16 December 2011 Appearances: C S Withnall QC for Appellant
M McClelland and H Brown for Respondent Judgment: 23 March 2012
JUDGMENT OF WHATA J

[1] Over a period of some ten years Mr Vohora has objected to documenting standard operating procedures. He says that they are instruments of delegation. In his view pharmacists should not delegate key functions to staff and therefore standard operating procedures are not only unnecessary but are inappropriate. Mr Vohora was charged with professional misconduct within the scope of his practice, or in the alternative, professional misconduct bringing discredit to the profession. Key facts are agreed. Mr Vohora did not keep a controlled drugs register for a period of four years and has not, over some ten years, documented standard operating procedures. The Tribunal considered that this was both misconduct within the scope of his practice and misconduct bringing discredit to the profession. Mr Vohora appeals on the basis that standard operating procedures do not fall within the scope of his practice. There is no evidence of any harm to any patient and he has always acted with due care in the dispensing of medicines. He also says that because
VOHORA V A PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT COMMITTEE HC DUN CIV-2011-412-000762 [23 March 2012]

he was charged in the alternative, the Tribunal erred by mixing and matching the types of misconduct when it arrived at its penalty, namely cancellation of his registration.
[2] I must resolve whether Mr Vohora's so called principled protest was professional misconduct attracting discipline, and if so whether it warranted the Tribunal's sanction of cancellation.
Background

The charges

[3] Mr Vohora was notified of the following charges (among others):

1. The Committee charges that Mr Vohora as the proprietor and sole pharmacist of Pharmacare Highgate Maori Hill Pharmacy (`the Pharmacy') is guilty of professional misconduct in that he has committed acts or omissions that a) amount to malpractice or negligence in relation to his scope of practice (section 100(1)(a) of the Act) or, in the alternative, b) that he has committed an act or omission that has or is likely to bring discredit to the profession (section 100(1)(b) of the Act).
2. The acts or omissions that the Committee alleges amount to professional misconduct are that Mr Vohora:

[4] The particulars of the charge relevant to this appeal include:

a. Has acted in breach of the Medicines Regulations 1984 in that he instructed and/or allowed an unqualified person, Siraya O'Sullivan, to dispense prescription medicine in breach of regulation 42 of the Medicines Regulations.

...

c. Has acted in breach of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 1977 in that from 30 June 2006 to 16 April 2010...

...

e

Has failed to practise in accordance with the Pharmacy Council

Code of Ethics in that he failed to document standard operating

procedures ...

Agreed facts

[5] The background to the charges is recorded in an agreed summary of facts.1 They set the frame for the proceedings. Relevantly the summary states:

1

Background

1.1 Ravi Vas Vohora is a registered pharmacist. At all material times, Mr Vohora was the proprietor and sole pharmacist of Maori Hill Pharmacy (the `Pharmacy').

1.2 The Pharmacy is open Monday to Friday from 9 am to 5:45 pm.

1.3 At the time of the audit, the Pharmacy employed Siraya O'Sullivan and Amy Perkins. Following Ms O'Sullivan's departure from the pharmacy, Mr Vohora employed Moselle Storm. Both Ms Storm and Ms Perkins were employed as full-time trainee pharmacy technicians enrolled with the Pharmacy Industry Training Organisation (`PITO'). Ms Perkins ceased employment at the Pharmacy in April 2011 and Ms Storm ceased employment in July 2011. Presently, the Pharmacy employs a locum pharmacist who assists with dispensing. The Pharmacy employs casual staff for non-dispensing duties, as needed.

1.4 The Pharmacy dispenses approximately 65 prescriptions per day.

1.5 The Pharmacy has developed and operated its own software application for dispensing purposes and does not use Toniq or Healthsoft software.

2

Audit of the Pharmacy

2.1 Mr Vohora had refused all audits at the Pharmacy from 2002 to 2004. The Pharmacy underwent audits in 2005 and 2006, however, between 2007 and 2009 Mr Vohora refused all audits of the Pharmacy.

2.2 Mr Vohora was informed on 23 March 2010, that an audit of the Pharmacy would take place on 14 April 2010 by David Sinclair, an Advisor in the Medicines Control team, a division of the Ministry of Health (the `Ministry') (refer to the Agreed Bundle of Documents (`ABD'), tab 1, page 2). Medicines Control also sent Mr Vohora a letter explaining the audit process and attached a copy of the audit tool that was to be used for the audit. An audit tool is an approved checklist used by Medicines Control Advisors to gather evidence of compliance and effectiveness in meeting legislative requirements and published pharmacy quality standards.

1 Common Bundle of Documents Volume 1 at 32.

2.3 Also on 23 March 2010 Medicines Control sent Mr Vohora a letter attaching a pre-visit questionnaire (also known as a `desk audit') and asked Mr Vohora to complete the questionnaire prior to the audit and return this by 8 April 2010 (ABD, tab 2, page 4). The questionnaire was not returned prior to the audit. Mr Vohora recalls handing the questionnaire, partially completed, to the auditor at the start of the audit, however. Mr Sinclair does not recall receiving it.
2.4 Prior to the audit taking place, Mr Vohora sent Medicines Control a letter in which he described the deficiencies in his record keeping over the years (ABD, tab 3, page 15).
2.5 On 14 April 2010, David Sinclair carried out the announced audit of the Pharmacy.
2.6 The audit report is dated 14 April 2010 and sets out Medicines Control's findings (ABD, tab 4, page 16). The report was sent to Mr Vohora on 21 April 2010.
2.7 As part of the audit, Medicines Control spoke to Mr Vohora and to Ms Siraya O'Sullivan who was employed in the Pharmacy.
2.8 A summary of the findings of the audit are set out below.

3

Findings

Pharmacy Staff

3.1 The audit report explains the role of Siraya O'Sullivan, an employee of the Pharmacy. The audit findings state that Ms O'Sullivan's employment status was described as a `pharmacy technician student', that she had been employed in this role for 11 months, but that she was not enrolled in an approved training course for pharmacy technicians. Mr Vohora confirmed that Ms O'Sullivan was not enrolled with PITO.

3.2 The audit report describes this as being a `high-risk issue' due to the fact that Ms O'Sullivan had not been enrolled and was not undertaking a recognised pharmacy technician course and therefore should not be performing any dispensing tasks.

...

3.4 At the date of the audit Mr Vohora did not hold a current Annual Practising Certificate. His annual practising certificate had expired on 31 March 2010 (ABD, tab 5, page 37).

3.5 Mr Vohora advised Medicines Control that he had submitted his application for renewal of his practising certificate to the Pharmacy Council.

Controlled Drugs Register

3.6 Medicines Control inspected the Controlled Drugs Register and found that entries had not been made in the Controlled Drugs Register since 30 June 2006.

3.7 Mr Vohora acknowledges that no entries were made in the Controlled Drugs Register after the audit in 2006.

3.8 Medicines Control concluded that the Controlled Drugs Register was not properly maintained for the following reasons:

a

entries had not been recorded since 30 June 2006

b

it did not comply with Schedule 1, Form 1 as required by

regulation 37(2) of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations

c

all controlled drugs purchased and dispensed and/or in the

Pharmacy's possession were not recorded in the Controlled

Drugs Register within one business day from the dispensing

taking place or the Pharmacy gaining possession of the

controlled drug

d

stock takes of all controlled drugs in the Pharmacy's

possession were not carried out on 30 June and 31 December

of every year

e

a quantity stock account had not been performed or entered

into the Controlled Drugs Register from 30 June 2006

f

any destruction and/or return of controlled drugs was not

recorded

g

there was no accurate record of the quantity of controlled

drugs that were held at the Pharmacy.

3.9 Mr Vohora told Medicines Control that he had recorded purchases and dispensing of controlled drugs in a pharmacy diary. Mr Vohora showed Mr Sinclair a drawer where he retained the controlled drug prescriptions and invoices for controlled drug purchases.

3.10 Mr Sinclair contacted the Licensing Authority (Sue Scott) to ask for her advice as to what further course of action should be taken. Later that day, the Licensing Authority called Mr Sinclair and told him that she would be sending Mr Vohora a letter by fax that proposed to add a condition to his License to Operate the Pharmacy that would prohibit the storage and dispensing of Class A and Class B controlled drugs.

...

Standard Operating Procedures

3.12 Medicines Control found that the Pharmacy did not have a document describing the Pharmacy's standard operating procedures in respect of:

a

dispensing procedures, including information about how

dispensing incidents (including errors and near misses) are

managed, recorded and evaluated, and including procedures

for dispensing medicines in unit dose packs

b

compounding processes, including information about

documenting the process, batch number and expiry dates of

ingredients and documenting the assigned expiry date of

new medicines

c

the procedure for accounting for Pharmacy stock which

included ordering and checking incoming medicines

d

cleaning and monitoring the Pharmacy refrigerator and the

appropriate action to be taken in the event of a refrigerator

failure

e

waste disposal, including allocating a clearly labelled area

for the quarantine of rejected or returned medicines

f

staff development and training, including the orientation

and/or induction of new staff and locums

g

infection control, including information describing the

procedure for reporting incidents

h

the procedures for dealing with complaints.

3.13 Medicines Control did locate a dispensing diary which recorded incidents. It also noted that during the audit it was shown `check lists' of the procedures at the Pharmacy, that staff members could refer to. Mr Vohora described the check lists as `memory aids' written by and for individual staff members to serve as reminders to instructions from Mr Vohora. In relation to these lists, Medicines Control noted that:

a

it was normal practice for each staff member to write and

keep their own lists

b

the lists were discarded when it was considered that the staff

member was performing to meet the requirement as

documented on the list

c

the lists were not formally approved, retained or reviewed.

Conclusion of audit

3.14 At the conclusion of the audit, Mr Sinclair told Mr Vohora that he was running out of time and would send him a fax the next day

attaching a `Declaration of Correction of Critical/High Risk Audit Findings'. 3.15 Following the audit report, Mr Vohora requested that Mr Sinclair explain how the findings were determined as `high risk'. Mr Sinclair informed Mr Vohora that the high risk finding was made with reference to the audit tool `Risk Assessment Matrix'. In particular, the failure to implement the requirements for maintaining a Controlled Drugs Register were considered to be a significant departure from expected standards and that the consequences of not doing this put the public at risk. Mr Sinclair explained that the other high risk factor was Ms O'Sullivan working at the Pharmacy as a technician without being enrolled in an approved course.
[6] I have excluded agreed facts that are not relevant to the appeal. One agreed fact [at 3.3] is now disputed. It has been excluded.
The hearing
[7] Shortly after the commencement of the hearing the Chair of the Tribunal referred Mr Vohora to s 100(1)(d), namely:
The practitioner has practised his or her profession while not holding a current practising certificate ... .
[8] The Chair then noted that Mr McClelland wished to add s 100(1)(d) to the charge. The Chair then stated:
... the addition of the references to s 100(1)(d) is an appropriate addition.
[9] The hearing then progressed to address the substance of the complaints against Mr Vohora.
Decision
[10] On 7 September 2011, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal delivered its oral decision and found that the charge of professional misconduct in relation to particulars (a), (c) and (e) of the charge had been established. The Tribunal issued its written decision on 23 September 2011.

[11] For the purposes of this appeal the following findings are particularly relevant.
Particular (a): Breach of Medicines Regulations 1984
[12] The Tribunal found that an employee of Mr Vohora, Ms O'Sullivan, was performing dispensing duties. It observed that the starting point for consideration of Ms O'Sullivan's role was that she had access to and was authorised to work in the dispensary. It stated that labelling is an aspect of dispensing2 and that it is vital that correct information be conveyed to all users of prescribed medicine. The Tribunal was advised that Ms O'Sullivan's role was to generate a label for the purposes of prescription medicine. Ms O'Sullivan would be required to check a patient's history, check product limits, capture important information for the pharmacist and then transcribe the information from the screen to paper for him to check.3
[13] The Tribunal then observed: 4
The evidence thus established that there was a process of interpretation involved in accessing and copying out relevant data. Part of the information which was being accessed was confidential patient information kept only for the purpose of dispensing.
[14] The Tribunal also found that Ms O'Sullivan was an unqualified person to dispense prescription medicine in breach of regulation 42. The Tribunal then observes that it is evident from Ms O'Sullivan's statement to Mr Sinclair that she herself thought she was dispensing and was permitted to do so. Having found a breach, however, the Tribunal considered that in all the circumstances it was borderline as to whether it would warrant discipline.5
2 Citing s 2 Medicines Act 1981 3 Decision of the New Zealand Health Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 400/Phar11/183P, 23
September 2011, at para 31.2 4 Ibid at para 31.2 5 Ibid at para 43

Particular (c): Breach of Misuse of Drugs Regulations 1977
[15] Dealing with particular (c), the Tribunal observed that Mr Vohora acknowledged that he had failed in his responsibility to maintain the register in the manner necessary since the time of the audit in 2006, and accepted that such failure was a significant breach of professional responsibility. The Tribunal observed that in a letter to the Tribunal Mr Vohora said that it became necessary for him to adopt an act of principled protest to obtain the needed co-operation. It is further recorded6 that Mr Vohora strongly believed that steps such as those contained in Part 3 of a series of New Zealand Codes of Good Manufacturing Practice and the use of standard operating procedures (SOPs) were inconsistent with the recommendations of a report produced by the Nuffield Foundation in 1986. The Tribunal observed further that the non-compliance with the controlled drugs register (CDR) continued for four years. The Tribunal then observed:
55. The Tribunal considers there could never be a justification for deliberate non compliance with the obligations of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations for a period of some four years. The obligation to complete the CDR in a timely way was a significant one; and Mr Vohora for his own reasons decided not to comply with the law.
56. That is a very serious professional breach.
[16] The Tribunal then resolved that it was a significant breach of professional standards; considered on its own it would undoubtedly warrant discipline.
Particular (e) 